# Computer-Architecture-Assembly-Simulator-
Computer Architecture Assembly Simulator Project: Team Members will develop a assembly simulator similar to MIps.
*******************************************************************************************************************************
Team Memebers: Victor Coleman, Nate Jones, Nicholas Krustchinsky, Hanna Little-Neuhaus

Description:
Develop an instruction-by-instruction simulator for a pipelined MIPS processor. The simulator
will execute instructions from the input assembly file one-by-one and display the contents of the register
file and memory after the program has finished execution.

Simulator must implement the MIPS instructions listed in the table below.
Supported instructions:
• ADD - signed integer addition
• ADDI - add immediate
• SUB - signed integer subtraction
• MUL - integer multiplication
• AND - bitwise and operation
• OR - bitwise or operaton
• SLL - shift left logical
• SRL - shift right logical
• LW - load word
• SW - store word
• BEQ - branch if equal to
• J - jump
• NOP - no op

The simulator should be faithful to the 5-stage pipelined MIPS processor we have studied in class.
For example, although it is possible to simulate the pipelined design without the use of state
registers, you should not do so. Make sure all critical elements are represented in your simulator.

Input to this program is going to be a valid assembly program in MIPS. This program was made with the 
assumption that this MIPS program is free of data and control hazards. The input program can be written 
by hand or generated by a compiler.
 ********************************************************************************************************************************
These are all of the cpp files of our program (not including the header files associated with each cpp file): 
• Alu.cpp
• Assembler.cpp
• ControlUnit.cpp
• Encoder.cpp
• Formatter.cpp
• Main.cpp
• Mappings.cpp
• Memoryc.cpp
• Opcode.cpp
• PipelineRegisters.cpp
• RegisterFile.cpp
• Simulator.cpp

In order to compile the program,
use commands (from directory Computer-Architecture-Assembly-Simulator-):

        make

        OR

        g++ -std=c++17 src/*.cpp -o mips-sim

To run the program:
        ./mips-sim input-path [-d debug]
 
        Input files are available in tests directory, e.g. to run input3.asm,
        ./mips-sim tests/input3.asm

        To run in debug mode, add argument -d at the end of command, e.g.
        ./mips-sim tests/input3.asm -d

 ********************************************************************************************************************************
 This Mips_Simulator is simplifed version of the Mars Assembly program thats based in C++ and it models the 5 pipeline stages: IF - instruction fetch -> ID - instruction decode -> EX - Execute -> MEM - Memory -> WB - Write back

 While also supporting a limited amount of Operations like:• 
• ADD, ADDI, SUB, MUL, AND, OR, SLL, SRL, LW, SW, BEQ, J, Nop 

What each file is responsible for
• Alu.cpp - implements math and lgoic operation for each supported operation.
• Assembler.cpp - Wrapper for encoder, which tracks instruction address, labels, and removes comments.
• Encoder.cpp -  Convert MIPS instructions to machine code.
• ControlUnit.cpp - Generates signal during decode stage that turn turn off/on the that matches the instrsuction type being read.
• Main.cpp -  Entry point for building and running the simaulteor
• Mappings.cpp - Contains function mapping to regsiters 
• Memoryc.cpp - Simulate memory with word aligned access
• PipelineRegisters.cpp - Formats and handles the the R,J,I instruction types
• RegisterFile.cpp - Simulates the CPU register file with 32 registers.
• Simulator.cpp - coordinates pipeline stages and system execution 


Formatter.cpp - Writes each instruction to a file of the same name in MIPS/Hex/Binary representation. 
These files can be found in the input_fancy folder of the project.
Formatter is effectively just another assembler, except it preserves information about the original code instead of discarding.

Build/run Instructions
Compile all src files using cmd: g++ -std=c++17 *.cpp -o simulator
Then run any test of your choosing via cmd: ./main ../tests/input3.asm
For debug mode run cmd: ./main ../tests/input3.asm -d

Prepare an input assembly file containing valid instructions.
If instructions (or rather, a line) is invalid, it will be turned into NOP.
Manual insertion of NOP may be required to stall pipeline and prevent hazards from occurring.

If debug mode is enabled in main.cpp, the simulator will print cycle-by-cycle pipeline states after execution, the simulator will also print results: Final register file contents.
Non-zero memory contents

Pipeline Behavior:
The simulates the processesing of instructions through all five stages each cycle. Stages execute in reverse order within each cycle (WB → MEM → EX → ID → IF) to prevent overwriting intermediate values. Pipeline registers pass both data and control signals between stages.

Memory Alignment:
All memory accesses must be word-aligned (multiples of 4). If its unaligned then it will in a runtime error. 
For example:
        Valid: lw $t0, 4($t1)
        Invalid: lw $t0, 2($t1)

